I followed this course by, Prof. Benno van den Berg during my [[5th Semester]] at the [[University of Amsterdam]] for my [[M.Sc. Logic (UvA)]]. A full description of the course can be found in the MasterMath website at [link](https://elo.mastermath.nl/course/view.php?id=1031).
#### Assignments
- [Overleaf: CatTh, 1](https://www.overleaf.com/read/mxzfynhjhmcv#6beb48)
- [Overleaf: CatTh, 2](https://www.overleaf.com/read/nfqswxwwbxyq#c8c101)
- [Overleaf: CatTh, 3](https://www.overleaf.com/read/xnntfcybtrrd#f4a180)
- [Overleaf: CatTh, 4](https://www.overleaf.com/read/bjgkgrskxnxv#0e93f1)
- [Overleaf: CatTh, 5](https://www.overleaf.com/read/vvxwycrtgvmj#83fd24)
- [Overleaf: CatTh, 6](https://www.overleaf.com/read/tvyjvxpsbrgc#8bbc64)

I use [https://q.uiver.app](https://q.uiver.app/) to draw the diagrams.
## Lecture Notes
#### Category
- A cath. $\mathcal{C}$ is a tuple of:
	1. $Ob(\mathcal{C})$ collection of _objects_ of $\mathcal{C}$
	2. $Mor(\mathcal{C})$ of _morphisms/arrows_ in $\mathcal{C}$
		- hence, for $f \in Mor(\mathcal{C})$, then $dom(f), cod(f) \in Ob(\mathcal{C})$
		- $f: A \to B := f \in Mor(\mathcal{C}) \land dom(f) = A \in Ob(\mathcal{C}) \land cod(f) = B \in OB(\mathcal{C})$
	- hence, $\mathcal{C}$ is a directed-multi-graph
	3. s.t. $\forall_{A \in Ob(\mathcal{C})} \exists_{1_A \in Mor(\mathcal{C})} 1_A: A \to A$
	4. if $\exists_{f: A \to B} \exists_{g: B \to C} \top \to \exists_{g \circ f: A \to C} \top$
		1. s.t. $f \circ 1_A = f = 1_B \circ f$ and $h \circ (g \circ f) = (h \circ g ) \circ f$ 
- A category is uniquely defined by:
	1. $Ob(C)$ a class
	2. $Mor(\mathcal{C})$ a class of the form $\{(A_1, B_1), ...\}$ for $A_i \in Ob(\mathcal{C})$
	4. $\circ: Mor(\mathcal{C}) \times Mor(\mathcal{C}) \to Mor(\mathcal{C})$
		- by ex.1 specifying what is the identity of each object, is not necessary, since they're unique
- $\mathcal{C}$ is loc.small if $ZFC \models \forall_{A, B \in Ob(\mathcal{C})}\exists_{x} x = Mor(A, B)$
- $\mathcal{C}$ is small if $Ob(\mathcal{C})$ and $Mor(\mathcal{C})$ are sets.
- a _Monoid_ is a one-obj. loc.small category
- a small category without parallel arrows is a preorder
	- write $A \le B$ if $\exists_{f: A \to B} \top$.
	- by def. of cat. given above, "$\le$" is trans. and refl.
- for $\mathcal{C}$ cat., $f: A \to B$ is iso. if ex. $g: B \to A$ s.t. $g \circ f = 1_A \land f \circ g = 1_B$
	- $g$ is unique and called the _inverse_ of $f$
- $Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(A, B)$ all arrows from $A$ to $B$, (homeset)
-  $f : A \to B$ is split.epi if ex $g: B \to A$ s.t. $fg = 1_B$ 
	- ($g$ is called a section of $f$, and $f$ a retraction of $g$)
#### Functor
- Fundamentally categories can be as generalisations of:
	- _Monoid_
		- in fact, cart.prod. of categories is a category.
	- _Preorders_
- _Product Category_: $\mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{D}$
	1. $Ob(\mathcal{C} \times \mathcal{D}) := \{(C_0, D_0): C_0 \in Ob(\mathcal{C}) \land D_0 \in \mathcal{D}\}$
	2. $Hom_{\mathcal{C}\times \mathcal{D}}((C_0, D_0),(C_1, D_1)) := Hom_\mathcal{C}(C_0, C_1) \times Hom_\mathcal{D}(D_0, D_1))$ 
	3. $(g_0, g_1) \circ (f_0, f_1) := (g_0 \circ f_0, g_1 \circ f_1)$ 
- _Opposite Category:_ $\mathcal{C}^{op}$
	1. $Ob(\mathcal{C}^{op}) := Ob(\mathcal{C})$
	2. $Hom_{\mathcal{C}^{op}}(A, B) := Hom_{\mathcal{C}}(B, A)$ 
	3. $g \circ_{\mathcal{C}^{op}} f := f \circ_{\mathcal{C}} g$ 
- Duality principle: of any definition, I can always find a dual (co-)
	- initial / terminal object
		- Terminal objects are unique up to unique isomorphism
	- $f: A \to B$ is a mono ifg. $fg = fh \to g = h$
		- mono are "often" inj.func
			- proved for $\textbf{Set}$
			- in $\textbf{Cat}$: $F$ mono iff. $F$ inj.on.obj. and faithful, ex.1
	- $f: A \to B$ is epi iff. $gf = hf \to g = h$
		- epi are "often" surj.func
			- proved for $\textbf{Set}$
			- in $\textbf{Cat}$: $F$ surj.onobj. and full $\Rightarrow$ $F$ full., ex.1
- recall $(\mathbb{N}, +)$ is a generated by $1$.
- **Functor**: 
	1. $F_0: {C}_0 \to {D}_0$ 
	2.  $\forall_{a, b \in \mathcal{C}_0}\exists_{F_1^{a, b}}F_1^{a, b}: Hom_\mathcal{C}(a, b) \to Hom_\mathcal{D}(F(a), F(b))$ 
	3. s.t. $\forall_{F(A), F(B)}F(A_A^\mathcal{C}) = 1^\mathcal{D}_{F(A)}$ 
	4. $F(\beta) \circ_\mathcal{D} F(\alpha) = F(\beta \circ_\mathcal{C} \alpha)$ 
- **Functorial Structures**
	- Example: $R$ a ring, $M_2(R)$ the $2 \times 2$ matrixes with components in $R$,
		- is $M_2: \textbf{Ring} \to \textbf{Ring}$, $f: R \to S$, $M_2(f) : M_2(R) \to M_2(S), M_s(f) \left(\begin{smallmatrix} a,\; b\\ c, \; d \end{smallmatrix}\right) =  \left(\begin{smallmatrix} f(a), f(b)\\ f(c), f(d) \end{smallmatrix}\right)$ 
	- $F: \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$, if $\alpha \in \mathcal{C}_1$ iso, then $F(\alpha)$ iso.
- $F$ _full_ if $\forall_{A, B \in \mathcal{C}_0} surj.(F^{A, B}: Hom_\mathcal{C}(A; B) \to Hom_\mathcal{D}(FA, FB))$
- $F$ _faithful_ if $\forall_{A, B \in \mathcal{C}_0} inj.(F^{A, B}: Hom_\mathcal{C}(A; B) \to Hom_\mathcal{D}(FA, FB))$
- $F$ _fully faithful_ if _full_ and _faithful_
- $F$  _fully faithful has _reflection_ on isos, i.e. if $\alpha: A \to B$ s.t. $F_1(\alpha)$ iso, then $\alpha$ iso.
#### Natural Transformation
- for $\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}$ ex. $[\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}]$ cat. s.t. $[\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}]_0 = Hom_{\textbf{Cat}}(\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D})$, $[\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}]_1$ are _natural transformations_
	- an element of it is $\mu_C : F(C) \to G(C)$ 
	- for $F, G: \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$ a nat.tr. $\sigma : F \Rightarrow G$ is a fam. of morph. $\forall_{C \in \mathcal{C}_0}\sigma_C : F(C) \to G(C)$ s.t.
		1. for $\forall_{C, C' \in \mathcal{C}_0} \exists_{\alpha \in Hom_\mathcal{C}(C, C')} Diag.Comm.$, (Naturality Condition)
			1. $Diag$: $F(C) \to^{F(\alpha)}FC' \to^{\sigma_{C'}} G(C')$ and $F(C) \to^{\sigma_C} G(C) \to^{G(\alpha)} G(C')$ 
	- if $\sigma: F \Rightarrow G$ in $[\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}]$ is iso. iff $\forall_{C \in \mathcal{C}_0} iso.(\sigma_C)$ 
	- note: $\circ: [\mathcal{D}, \mathcal{E}] \times [\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}] \to [\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{E}]$, functor composition, is ==the object part of a functor==, 3.3
#### Equivalence of Categories
- $\mathcal{C} \simeq \mathcal{D}$ if there are functors $F: \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$, $G: \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$ s.t.
	1. $G \circ F \cong 1_\mathcal{C}$
	2. $F \circ G \cong 1_\mathcal{D}$ 
	- it is called _equivalence_ and $G$ is the _pseudo-inverse_
	- also $\cong$ is isomorphism of categories
		- $\mathcal{C} \cong \mathcal{D}$ iff ex. $F' : \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$, $G' : \mathcal{D} \to \mathcal{C}$ s.t. (i) $G \circ F = 1$, (ii) $F \circ G = 1$
- Equivalence _preserves_ and _reflects_ terminal objects (and most other properties)
- $F: \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$ is an equivalence iff:, 3.6
	1. $F$ is essentially surjective
		- that is: $\forall_{D \in \mathcal{D}_0} \exists_{C \in \mathcal{C}_0} F(C) \cong D$
	2. $F$ is fully faithful
		- $F$ is full and faith
#### Limits
- for $F: \mathcal{C} \to \mathcal{D}$, a _cone_ is $(D, \mu)$ s.t.  $D \in \mathcal{D}_0$, $\mu: \Delta_D \Rightarrow F$ (cone), 4.1
	- $\Delta_D : \mathcal{C}\ \to \mathcal{D}$, for $g: D \to D'$
	- $\Delta_g: \Delta_D \to \Delta_{D'}$ s.t. $(\Delta_g)_C = G$.
	- $\Delta: \mathcal{D} \to [\mathcal{C}, \mathcal{D}]$
-  $(D, \mu) \to (D', \mu')$, is a map $g: D \to D'$ s.t. $\mu' \circ \Delta_g = \mu$ (map of cones), 4.1
- a lim.cone for $F$ is term.obj of $Cone(F)$ (limiting cone)
- a lim.con for $!: \textbf{0} \to \mathcal{D}$ is term.obj. in $\mathcal{D}$
	- $Cone(!) \cong \mathcal{D}$ 
- These section are better understood in the Lecture Notes
	- 4.1.2
	- 4.1.3
	- 4.1.4
- 