---
draft: true
---
This project applies in the scenario in which I am either not allowed to short term sublet nor have registration at the address. The two scenarios present differences though:

**No Short-Term Sublet**: In this scenario, since I need to be registered to the house for two years before legally subletting ([Regulations](https://www.amsterdam.nl/en/housing/letting-room-living-someone/)), I will not be able to sublet long term either. Because of this, I can ask the landlord to give me permission for the B&B registration, if that works out I can start with long term rentals (though taxed in Box 1 instead of Box 3, see [[Taxes in the Netherlands.fi]] ); this will therefore need to gradually shift to a short term rental. Alternatively, depending on how bad the owner's vibe is concerning the short-term stay and how it develops over time, I might abandon the idea of the [[Airbnb in Amsterdam.fi]] completely and instead opt for what I present below, i.e. the same case for in case I don't get registration.

**No Registration**: This implies that I cannot (short-term) sublet (see [[Airbnb in Amsterdam.fi#Legal Constrains]]). In this case all contracts must be written between the landlord and the students coming in the house, I will not have, in this sense, any administrative power. I still am though, the only one having the contact of the landlord and of the other potential tenants and can use this information as follows: I will make the offer to students for a fixed price, independent from one to the other, that must be as high as the market can get. Now there are two options: the prices add up to less than 3500€, in such a case I will need to add the difference and that will be my rent or the prices add up to more than 3500€, in this cases I need the profit not to result in an higher rent paid to the landlord but instead to a profit for myself ready to potentially compensate other moments in which there will not be enough income to cover the whole rent (i.e. my rent becomes far too high).

Before reasoning on how those profits can be collected, I shall see whether such a scenario is realistic:
There will be three bedrooms to rent, considering that I will keep the dining room for myself. In this [table](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/142t3o9AxR8modTYMtloQmMi9kdNnc4yWRc6y7Atwq5E/edit) I present the possible scenarios. If I consider not to rent the living room, which would mean to have a 5th student in the house, which may be not allowed by the landlord, I will, in the best case scenario, not pay the rent. Only in the case in which the owner expressively allows a 5th tenant, then I can reason on how to take that profit.
