---
draft: false
date: 2024-06-11
---
###### Methodological Remark
While most voices against gender equality appeal to biological nature, whose full comprehension requires technical skills often not possessed, there is another form of argumentation that despite requiring simpler data may offer clarifying results on the same matter. That is, instead of looking at the causes of the phenomena, trying to observe agents _behaviour_ in different environments and derive conclusions solely from those (see [Behaviorism](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Behaviorism)).
###### Sex Sameness Claim
With Sex Sameness I mean the claim there is no skill relevant to a subset of the job market such that there are _accidental_ differences in its distribution on the two sexes. I stress the word "accidental" which shall be interpreted as "true but not necessarily true", that is to say that it could be otherwise; since the very practical context does not make clear what actually is necessary or not, I claim necessary those traits that cannot change in any culturally different foreseeable future, for instance average man being taller is not accidental, pink being a female colour is accidental.

Sex sameness on the totality of the job market is trivially wrong since there are skills relevant for some jobs whose biological nature is evident, e.g. physical strength has a different statistica distribution and is not _accidental_. The question remains debatable regarding, for instance, scientific and technical fields.
###### The Behaviorist Argument
A behaviorist argument against sex sameness has the following structure: one compares behaviors in two environments, one in which sexes behave differently and there is a low effort to make them behave similarly and the second one in which the effort is increased but the sexes surprisingly behave even more differently.  In this text I focus on a particular type of these arguments, namely those that operate on an increment of freedom to expect a more similar behavior of men and women but that instead give a more diverse behavior, call those _Liberal Behaviorist Arguments_; here I give two examples.
###### Scandinavian Peninsula
This argument is often exposed by [J. Peterson](https://www.jordanbpeterson.com/) to motivate his standpoint against sex sameness for the vast majority of job markets. %%He exposes it in ==quote==.%%. I summarise the argumentation highlighting the connection with the structure exposed above: first he notices the average west world has an actual vast diversity in the behavioral professional choice between the sexes, secondly he compares with the condition of the Scandinavia Peninsula, where, so he claims, much more efforts have been spent in order to give men and women more freedom to chose their job. This, so I suppose, both on a social level, i.e. attempting to diminish the gender differences, and on a financial level, i.e. decreasing the salary difference between the traditionally-male and the traditionally-female jobs. Despite this efforts, so he claims, the behavioral professional choice of the sexes increased in dissimilarity. This, he concludes, shows how a greater degree of freedom brings to a greater distance between the sexes and, hence, to more solidly distinguished genders.

This argument, other than requiring a deeper analysis and interpretation of the data, lacks in simplicity. A valid counter argument may simply underline how the high complexity of social dynamics around gender need a way larger amount of data and time before allowing us to derive any concrete conclusion significant to change the political choices that drove to those efforts in northern Europe. Next I present another argument of a similar structure that, so I claim, may result way simpler but still get to the same conclusion.
###### Chess
Here I write no more than an observation that shall not be taken seriously without previous research and abundance of data[^1]. Instantiating the argumentative structure presented above, I compare the educational and professional fields in science and technology to the landscape of amateur chess players, assuming that skills in those two fields have an high correlation[^2]. The first environment is certainly characterised both by a relatively low degree of freedom, because of stereotypes on genders and actual male presence[^3]. On the other hand chess, particularly at an amateur level, admittedly has a far higher degree of freedom[^4], mainly because it does not require such a full dedication in the player's life, stereotypes on genders are certainly present too but in a non-competitive level those shall be way less influential. Despite this higher degree of freedom among amateur chess players, I observe[^5] a far greater difference in sexes distribution.

[^1]: In footnotes I list all data that are missing and claims that require further thinking, if the reader wants to contribute and knows where such data may be found, see [[Comments]] or preferably [[Contacts]]]
[^2]: Usually good performances in both fields are correlated with _logical intelligence_, data are required.
[^3]: A comprehensive statistical analysis on distribution of sexes in those fields is required. Some way to quantify low degree of freedom, i.e. influence of stereotypes and other similar difficulties for women in the fields, is crucial but harder to get.
[^4]: I suppose that intuitively this may sound reasonable to most readers, though here too finding a way to quantify that _higher degree of freedom_ would be crucial.
[^5]: Statistics on the different distribution of sexes in amateur sex are required data that should be easy to find, perhaps through chess.com and other similar platforms.

---
As always I am open to discussion (see [[Contacts]]) and encourage the reader to leave [[Comments]].

Against the Sex Sameness Claim regarding romantic relationship: [YT: Just Mick](https://youtu.be/h1d-4FddArk?si=RdiPrO5GdeFQILfz) (Italian).