---
draft: false
date: 2024-05-06
---
In occasion of the Italian "Festa della Liberazione" on the 25th April, I read both the "[Manifesto degli Intellettuali Fascisti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manifesto_of_the_Fascist_Intellectuals?wprov=sfti1)" by G. Gentile, 1925 and the "[Manifesto degli Intellettuali Antifascisti](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manifesto_of_the_Anti-Fascist_Intellectuals?wprov=sfti1)" by B. Croce also in 1925. The title of this brief text expressively goes against the fact that there is no third way other than Fascism and Antifascism, I therefore recall the _tertium non datur_ principle $A \lor \lnot A$ in one of its equivalent forms, $\lnot \lnot A \leftrightarrow A$. This refers to a claim by Prof. Barbero which became particularly popular in Italy in these days.

There are mainly two points I want to make: (i) is that present antifascism is not as distant from the one designed by B. Croce as one would think and (ii) that the main argument against fascism presented by Croce is of a conservative / conformist nature. Since I will quote directly from the source without translation the rest of the read will require to either know Italian or have a proper translation of the pieces I quote. For practical reasons I do not state exactly in which passages of the articles I found the parts I quote or talk about, the reader is encouraged to ask me directly ([[Contacts]]), in case of incorrespondences.

As described by Gentile (here I elaborate by considering also my personal understanding of it), Fascism seems to be made by three crucial concepts: (i) strong Hegelianism, (ii) a common Streben and (iii) violence as a mean. By the first I mean the strong sense of community and union of the citizens in the State, one may consider this feature to be common to left extremists too (I think a similar remark is presented by [[Books Index.bo#Harari]]). The second feature is what crucially distinguishes Fascism from the left extremism, since the latter aims to get to a static condition of peace that is seen as realisable, while Fascism has a far more abstract and idealised mission that will drive the State in a never ending Streben. Lastly, as famously underlined by Barbero (in [link](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C2E9LTzYI-E)), violence is and has always been a crucial (essential?) mean in the Fascist practice, this has been underlined by Gentile too. Gentile finally conceives Fascism as a "_fede_" a new religion that Italy needs in order not to fall into the modern corruption of values.

The main argumentation by Croce, as I understood it, goes as follows: we cannot conceive Fascism as a new religion, it has in fact no tradition nor any of the crucial features of a religion and Italy must therefore turn back to the liberal-democracy as a safe standpoint to which the State has been driven by history. This concept is most clearly exposed in the following passage by Croce:

"La nostra fede non è un'escogitazione artificiosa e astratta o un invasamento di cervello, cagionato da mal certe o mal comprese teorie; ma è il possesso di una tradizione, diventata disposizione del sentimento,
conformazione mentale e morale."

This, as Croce sees it, is a battle of faith and his religion is better because it conformed every person of the Italian society. 

At this point, one may, as I find reasonable, more than everything dislike conformism. Conformism, as the absence of critical thinking, can be reasonably seen as the worst argument one can give in favour of his own political belief since that cannot be argued rationally, it is instead nothing but _a result of an historical random walk_. If the argumentations by Gentile are to be considered far better is certainly debatable, though  he clearly does not appeal to a similarly conformism but instead other values which he claims to be of some common importance.

Modern Antifascism, as far as I have been exposed to it, seems to follow a similar path to the one by Croce. Modern Antifascism also has a Hegelian component, i.e. looks at Italy with proud and glory, and considers Fascism as a dark period in which Italy suddenly disappeared until its glory came out again. Contrary to Croce, modern Antifascism tries to give arguments for liberal democracies other than conformism but still enjoys to look at Italian history from the Rinascimento until today in its political continuum.

In this respect, I find that one can definitely give reasonable positions that cannot be classified as Fascist but cannot be classified as Antifascist either. Most of all, such a position is the one of a (weak) Anarchist that refuses any (or some) sorts of sacrifice of the individual for the State, they would certainly not fit into the Antifascist ideals, since they would find no pride in Italian history and, most of all, _no pride in the death of all those that fought against Fascism_. For this reason, I consider myself against the claim by Barbero that whoever is not Antifascist is a Fascist.

(To a less radical level I disagree with such a statement because an individual can certainly assert not to have enough information or interest in Italian history to declare himself on either side.)

---
As always I am open to discussion (see [[Contacts]]) and encourage the reader to leave [[Comments]].