---
date: 2024-09-13
title: Structuralism & Categories
---
I propose the following as a research project I want to pursue in the thin, though currently wider than ever, intersection between Philosophy of Science and Category Theory. I will propose this research project for the [[5th Semester#1st Year, 3rd Period]] of my [[M.Sc. Logic (UvA)]] to both Dr. Sebastian de Haro Ollé (lecturer of [[Philosophy of Science (Lecture)]]) and Prof. Benno van den Berg (lecturer of [[Category Theory (Lecture)]]), presenting it as a joint project. The reader, whoever they may be, shall always feel encouraged to leave [[Comments]].

In this page I begin by underlying the [[Structuralism & Categories (Homepage)#Personal Sources of the Project]], i.e. the competence and knowledge I have already developed and obtained in the field, which will work as a grounding structure of the research project. Consequently, I present more substantially the [[Structuralism & Categories (Homepage)#Project Structure & Goals]].
#### Personal Resources of the Project
Before getting into the proper skills and interest in the topic, I present my general background and my approach to the field and to general academic practice. I have studied both [[B.A. Philosophy (LMU)]] and in [[B.Sc. Mathematics (LMU)]] (30 ECTS remaining before completion) in 2 years (see [[Bachelors Outline]]), the first one at the University of Constance and the second at the LMU Munich. Now I am a first year student of the [[M.Sc. Logic (UvA)]] and, by keeping the same pace, I am considering to finish it within one year or to spend the second on own research (see [[5th Semester]]). The only relevant message that should come out of this, is that I intend to work substantially for this research project and let it count for the corresponding amount of credits, this though, I suppose, could not prevent [[Structuralism & Categories (Homepage)#Teamwork]].

To the more substantial information: for my [[M.Sc. Logic (UvA)]] I am taking both [[Philosophy of Science (Lecture)]] and [[Category Theory (Lecture)]], by the time of the begin of the research project the former course will be finished, though not the latter, which will just have reached half of the material; I will discuss with the lecturer which other sources shall be consulted in order to have the sufficient technical competence. During my [[B.A. Philosophy (LMU)]], I took a couple of other relevant courses for which I wrote essays that will give the basis to the [[Structuralism & Categories (Homepage)#Project Structure & Goals]]. In particular I followed a course "Category Theory for the Working Philosopher" a course which, after giving the necessary technical skills, delved into the applications of category theory within philosophy; for this course I wrote [[Structure on Models]], an essay which answered critically to [[Halvorson, H. (2012), What Scientific Theories Could not Be]]. I happened to write essays concerning structuralism also for a course in Philosophy of Logic, [[Correspondence]] and [[The Silent Assumption in Tarskian Semantics]]. Finally, I spent some time writing a critical comment to [[Horsten, L. (2010), Having an Interpretation]], by my former professor [[Leon Horsten]].
#### Project Structure & Goals
At first, I want the project to give a comprehensive account of my take and comprehension on structuralism. This first part solely concerns Philosophy of Science and will not solely focus on the theses by [[Hans Halvorson]], with whom I have more familiarity, but mostly with [[Bas van Fraassen]]. Part of this first discussion will concern observables and will integrate and revise my theses stated in [[Horsten, L. (2010), Having an Interpretation]]. Getting in more depth in the discussion on observables, will naturally drive the debate to the semantic and syntactic view, where I will expose my general take and my counter-argument to [[Halvorson, H. (2012), What Scientific Theories Could not Be]].

Secondly, once fully involved in the syntactic vs semantic view debate, I take into account the different uses of category theory in the field, in particular considering the literature connected to publications by [[Hans Halvorson]] I still have to explore.
##### Literature to Explore
Before precisely delineating the road I want to pursue in the project, I will go through a phase of reading papers on the topic, which I fortunately found [listed by Halvorson](https://www.princeton.edu/~hhalvors/phi536_s2011) (see the section "Does category theory help structuralism?"). This list of papers though focusses on the application of category theory in mathematical structuralism rather than in scientific structuralism.

The biggest focus of the research project will be on equivalence criteria of scientific theories, I will introduce myself to the topic by reading [Glymour and Quine on Theoretical Equivalence](https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/11341/1/glymour%26quine.pdf) and [Criteria of Identity and Structural Ontology](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Hannes-Leitgeb-2/publication/31349684_Criteria_of_Identity_and_Structuralist_Ontology/links/00463534fdb154f8b7000000/Criteria-of-Identity-and-Structuralist-Ontology.pdf?origin=publicationDetail&_sg%5B0%5D=ulrFKJxSo5jaNeCcC_G-SfIm5cfSOghXDvamINp01-TwUpbBUL2LZjzXUmEE_TSkJL4KY8RIQLMb78iVP7Yv9g.d4mRcbQrbo2MXHb7VkwdtNFfg3MZgisp3B7yGzzuAeAobShv-_XM3l4jFIBw5uU7fLgm5lNQGoWR08qbtX3w3g&_sg%5B1%5D=h_I-RdO0AXbmNUQr62JiRf-9ii05sny7fCG1xftvDZBrgPNtrjcbRebTln1M1wXcSNT3eNjdXzOCy3RgIQZTt-cSGX6SxWoaeZzrtxlZotb0.d4mRcbQrbo2MXHb7VkwdtNFfg3MZgisp3B7yGzzuAeAobShv-_XM3l4jFIBw5uU7fLgm5lNQGoWR08qbtX3w3g&_iepl=&_rtd=eyJjb250ZW50SW50ZW50IjoibWFpbkl0ZW0ifQ%3D%3D&_tp=eyJjb250ZXh0Ijp7ImZpcnN0UGFnZSI6InB1YmxpY2F0aW9uIiwicGFnZSI6InB1YmxpY2F0aW9uIiwicG9zaXRpb24iOiJwYWdlSGVhZGVyIn19).

More on the categortical side of philosophy of science I consider [Morita Equivalence](https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/review-of-symbolic-logic/article/abs/morita-equivalence/8DAAEFCE09A73F68E72A8E622D79D6A2) and [Categories in Scientific Theories](https://philpapers.org/rec/HALCOS), both written in collaboration with [[Hans Halvorson]]. The further literature, if not directly suggested by the project supervisors, will be selected from the bibliographies of these papers.
##### Hours of Work, Credits and Expected Length
As mentioned above, I expect to invest a considerable amount of time in the project, inf act I do not exclude to begin working for it before the end of the 2nd period. I expect the total length of the first part not to be below 20 pages, while the second may vary substantially (still comparable to the former) depending on the technical results I will get and skills I will develop, in a field which, in the end, is still new to me. I expect therefore the project to be around 20 EC (I am making this guess based on the comparison with the time spent for other courses, pages that one is expected to write and the time I foresee to invest in it, though I have no experience nor possibility of comparing the size of this project with others, hence I expect the involved professors to give me some indications on this).
##### Teamwork
Both the large amount of work I want to invest in the project and the necessity of having competence in two distant branches of human knowledge seem not to encourage the involvement of other students in the project. Despite this, I plan to present some portions of the project, limiting the required skills to one of the two fields, to some other students in the hope of getting some more hands and brains to further enlarge the scope of the research.

---
##### First Organisation Steps towards Realisation
1. Ask Dr. Sebastian de Haro Ollé and Prof. Benno van den Berg for approval
	1. Is it doable with satisfactory depth and completeness in 6 weeks? (I am counting Christmas vacation, in which I will begin reading the literature and determine potential research tracks for other students to collaborate)
	2. Do you have any literature to suggest? (Perhaps other related topics, or further papers in the same field. It would also help to have, particularly on the categorical side, some introduction to the technical skills required)
	3. Do you have any member of ILLC or other researcher to suggest? (Could be both for co-supervision or just for a one-time discussion on the topic with me and potentially other students involved)
	4. Does the field I described well fit your research interests? (Connected to the question above, if the field were not within your field of research, do you have somebody else to suggest, within or outside of the ILLC?)
	5. How many EC would you estimate? (Considering the remarks made above on the amount of pages the work will consist of, hours I plan to invest in and papers I plan to read before)
		6. How does participation of other students influence it? (considering that it would imply a proportionally larger amount of work, not delegation of present work but development of new ideas and branches of research)
2. Team Coordination
	1. Begin to read some literature, whatever is vaguely needed to make the sketch of a plan.
	2. Share this page to the group-chats of Category Theory and Philosophy of Science and search students willing to join the project.
		1. Make a [Google Form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdx_ATY579NgdwSeGapf1_-P9XYiqg6BDwgNxsD1U4_V4FzEA/viewform?usp=sf_link) with interests, competence area and background and select in case too many people wanted to participate.
	3. Schedule from two to five discussion-meetings with the other students on those papers that will be relevant for the project, in order of priority:
		1. [[Halvorson, H. (2012), What Scientific Theories Could not Be]]
		2. [Criteria of Identity and Structural Ontology](https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Hannes-Leitgeb-2/publication/31349684_Criteria_of_Identity_and_Structuralist_Ontology/links/00463534fdb154f8b7000000/Criteria-of-Identity-and-Structuralist-Ontology.pdf?origin=publicationDetail&_sg%5B0%5D=ulrFKJxSo5jaNeCcC_G-SfIm5cfSOghXDvamINp01-TwUpbBUL2LZjzXUmEE_TSkJL4KY8RIQLMb78iVP7Yv9g.d4mRcbQrbo2MXHb7VkwdtNFfg3MZgisp3B7yGzzuAeAobShv-_XM3l4jFIBw5uU7fLgm5lNQGoWR08qbtX3w3g&_sg%5B1%5D=h_I-RdO0AXbmNUQr62JiRf-9ii05sny7fCG1xftvDZBrgPNtrjcbRebTln1M1wXcSNT3eNjdXzOCy3RgIQZTt-cSGX6SxWoaeZzrtxlZotb0.d4mRcbQrbo2MXHb7VkwdtNFfg3MZgisp3B7yGzzuAeAobShv-_XM3l4jFIBw5uU7fLgm5lNQGoWR08qbtX3w3g&_iepl=&_rtd=eyJjb250ZW50SW50ZW50IjoibWFpbkl0ZW0ifQ%3D%3D&_tp=eyJjb250ZXh0Ijp7ImZpcnN0UGFnZSI6InB1YmxpY2F0aW9uIiwicGFnZSI6InB1YmxpY2F0aW9uIiwicG9zaXRpb24iOiJwYWdlSGVhZGVyIn19) (?)
		3. One text selected by [[Bas van Fraassen]]
		4. Eventually, for discussion: (agree or disagree with my strong position)
			1. [[Structure on Models]]
			2. [[Horsten, L. (2010), Having an Interpretation]]
	4. Have a final discussion so that, by the end of it, only those students that have their own topic of research are selected and combine a complete plan of the whole research project.
		1. Each student shall have their own plan and schedule
			- This will be submitted before the begin of the Christmas Vacation to the supervisors so that they can estimate the EC that will be assigned to each one of the students.
		2. We organise some check-points during the 3rd period so that we can discuss the present state of the work.